[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
We've all heard
of the hardships
of the Dalai Lama
when the Chinese moved
in and took over Tibet.
But it's little known that
another religious sect far older
than Buddhism was also
brutalized and displaced
during this time.
Harvey Rice and
Jackie Cole are here
to tell us the harrowing
tale of the Bön Monks
and what it took to survive
the Chinese invasion.
What a tale.
This is like an adventure
tale from the very beginning
to the end.
I knew it was hard,
but I had no idea
how hard it was for
the Tibetan monks
and the Bon monks to be
able to save their relics,
and their tradition,
and their religion.
So first, I want to ask you,
this is 18,000 years old.
The Bon religion is
18,000 years old.
The oldest continuous religion
in the world that we know of?
>>JACKIE COLE: Possibly.
The Bonpos will say that the
history is that it was founded
by Tonpa Shenrab
18,000 years ago.
There is no written
language from back then.
And so we have to
take the oral history.
It was carried on
by oral history,
so we have to take
the oral history.
Buddhism was introduced into
Tibet in the seventh century.
And at that time,
Bon was outlawed.
And so it went underground
for a number of centuries.
And when it came back, it was
being again to be practiced.
It looked very much like
the Tibetan Buddhism did.
The Buddhists will say that
the Bon borrowed from them,
and the Bonpo said,
now wait a minute.
We were here first.
You all came in and
adapted all of our stuff.
So really, you're the ones
that borrowed from us.
They look very similar.
The basic tenets of
compassion, and kindness,
and learning to tame your
mind are all very similar.
Now Bon is much more
earth-based and deals--
has to deal with the
elements and the spirits
of the earth, most
likely because it was
the original religion there.
Tibet is very difficult--
>>REGINA: Harsh.
>>COLE: Yes.
An extremely harsh and
difficult landscape.
And so you know
that the people who
live there would be appealing
to whatever they felt
were could help them to survive
and their crops to make it
and their animals
to stay healthy.
>>REGINA: And you would
think that if you're
going for spiritual
development, go
to a place that doesn't have
anything else by and large,
and you're going to have a
good chance to really focus
on your internal spirit.
There aren't a lot of
distractions there.
>>COLE: It's really amazing in
that the Tibetan language has--
it's like thinking about
the Swedish languages that
has so many words for snow.
The Tibetan language has
all these different words
for your mind and different
levels of consciousness
and everything, all because they
have spent so much time there.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>COLE: And so many of
the teachings that we have
in the Bon tradition are the
examples that they use to help
you to understand what they're
talking about are based on sky,
and space--
>>REGINA: The water.
>>COLE: --and the
vastness, all of which
are the pure definition of
Tibet, which I understood.
But when you're there, it's
like learning something and then
experiencing it.
When you're there
and experience it,
I completely and
totally now understand
why all of their teachings is
based on sky, and vastness,
and space.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>COLE: It's incredible.
>>REGINA: It makes total sense.
And Harvey, you're a journalist.
Give us a little bit of
your journalistic background
and how you got swept
into all of this.
>>HARVEY RICE: Yeah.
I've been a journalist
for about 40 years.
And at that time, I was working
for the Houston Chronicle,
and I worked out of my house.
And so I was sitting at my desk.
And Jackie came in one
day, and she said--
>>REGINA: Want to go to Tibet?
>> RICE: Well, she said, I've
learned this incredible story
from my teachers.
And she told me about it,
about how Tenzin Namdak had
been shot and left for dead.
And she said, what do you think
about doing a book about that?
And I said, yes, let's do it.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>> RICE: And so that's
when the book really began.
We began work on it.
And I had no idea where
the story would take us
because at that
point, we just knew
about him escaping and being
shot, and he had survived that.
But we didn't know
all the details.
We didn't know at that time
that they had actually--
would meet this Tibetologist,
who would take them to London,
and it would change their
lives and change their ability
to refound their
religion in India, out
of the grasp of the Chinese.
Because the Chinese
would allow nothing--
>>REGINA: Oh, we're
going to get into that.
>> RICE: --in Tibet without
them being able to control it.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And what it did is it
also, for the first time
in modern history, brought
the Tibetan and Bon religion
alive to the world,
which really--
we didn't really have a
lot of understanding of it.
And there was a reason for that.
They pretty much
kept to themselves.
And I remember
reading in the book
that it was hard
to get many allies.
We'll go into what happened
with Mao and all that
or Chiang Kai-Shek.
Hard to get a lot of allies
together when you're even
suspecting neighbors from the
neighboring village because you
have differences like one of
you puts yak butter in your tea
and the other doesn't.
And this creates
suspicion between people.
These are very isolated people
with set deeply set traditions
and not really part
of the outside world.
So there was no one to
really come to their aid.
>>COLE: Yeah.
They had isolated--
the country itself
had been isolated on purpose.
And the central government--
Tibet is so huge.
The central government
is set in around Lhasa.
And then you have these
vast areas of Kham and Amdo
out over in the eastern part,
which are closer to China.
And even though the Dalai
Lama was both the secular
and religious head of
Tibet, the people out here
really didn't listen very much
to the government in Lhasa
because they were
just so far away.
There were no roads.
There's no telegrams.
There's no communication
except by whoever's going
back and forth for trading.
And so there was at one point in
the '40s and people who wanted
to reform the government to the
point of providing a little bit
more outside influence and
also developing an army
for protection and
so on and so forth.
But they were actually defeated
by the central government,
pieces of the central
government who
felt that reform would,
for a number of reasons,
take power away from
the monasteries which
were very powerful.
So take power away
from the monasteries
and also have the
potential to defile
or anger the gods of the earth,
which they didn't want to do.
Because in order to do a lot of
that would have to modernize,
build roads, maybe
do some mining
to get money in order to
do these other things,
to stand up an
army and so forth.
And they just didn't want
to disturb what was--
>>REGINA: Their
relationship with the beings
that look over the earth.
Yeah.
>>COLE: And the power structure
that was in place at the time.
So they maintain that.
And because of that,
they had no allies,
and they had no
outside contacts much.
There had been a British
expedition previous to that.
But at the time China
invaded, the world politics
was such that the big nations
that could have saved them,
India and Britain and
the United States,
didn't want to get
into it with China.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And so we're going to go down
that little rabbit hole in a bit
here.
First of all, you guys
ended up traveling
to Tibet, Nepal, India.
And I want to say
that the Dalai Lama
himself wrote the
foreword to your book
because, well, he
isn't he the one
that actually sanctified
the practice of the Bonpos?
>> RICE: It was
in, I think, 1978,
he made Bon one of the
official religions of Tibet.
>>REGINA: After being
underground for so long.
>> RICE: But prior to
that, even to this day,
there are still some
Buddhists, Tibetan Buddhists,
who looked down their noses at
Bonpos as not being the correct
religion.
But the Dalai Lama
has accepted them.
But there has been a long
history of Buddhist oppression.
>>REGINA: Right.
So now let's get into
this meat of the story.
A little kid named
Tenzin, right?
He was part of the Bon.
And then we also, I think
it's important to lay out
that in terms of reading,
writing, education in general,
it all happens
through the monastery.
So to have your child
go into the monastery
is a privilege because they're
going to become educated for one
because there aren't
really, it sounds,
like educational facilities
outside of the monasteries back
in the day.
>>COLE: In the 50s, there
weren't any schools per se.
You had traveling monks
or traveling teachers
who would come around
and try to teach people,
teach the kids for a little bit.
But all of the education
was in the monasteries.
And it was a tradition
of the families
that the firstborn son
would go to the monasteries.
They both felt like it was
a donation to the faith,
but it was also a way to
provide their son with a better
life, because otherwise, it
was a difficult, hard life,
either as a farmer, or as a
herder of animals, or a trader.
If you were wealthy,
you often would
trade, which would mean
long treks with the yaks
and usually in the winter.
So it was a very difficult life.
So the monastery provided some
relief for some of the children.
It's interesting, the three
main characters that we had.
One wanted to be a monk.
The second one never
wanted to be a monk,
but his parents sent him anyway.
And the third one,
the family wanted--
Sangye Tenzin, his family wanted
him to stay in the business,
and he said, no, I
want to be a monk.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
They had some money.
They were a little better off.
So let's talk about Tenzin.
We're going to
start with his story
because he was a
stubborn little guy
and came from a family
of artists, right?
And these artists did--
his father it was
or grandfather that
did beautiful paintings
inside of a couple
of the great
monasteries of theirs.
>>COLE: It was his
mother's grandfather.
>>REGINA: The grandfather.
>>COLE: So the maternal
side of his family
were an artist family.
>>REGINA: So he learned
how to do artwork.
>>COLE: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK.
So he had a skill.
So let's talk about where
he's insistent he's going
to lead the spiritual life.
He's going to be a monk.
No one's stopping him.
>>COLE: Right.
>>REGINA: No one stopped him.
I just found out he
turns 100 in 2025.
This is a spoiler alert.
These are horrific things.
He made it through all this.
What a spirit.
>>COLE: Yes.
Yes.
And it's interesting, when
you're in his presence,
you feel nothing
but peace and calm.
He carries that spirit with him.
And yet his indomitable
spirit is what
has allowed Bon to survive.
If you ask most of
the Bonpos, they'll
say that he saved
Bon a second time.
So he became a monk.
And then through the art, he
was in a part of the country
away from where he
had been, the part
of the country that was closest
to the mother monastery, Menri.
So he traveled over there to
become ordained as a monk,
to take his vows, and
then went on a pilgrimage,
and then went back
there to learn to study.
So he wanted to study
with the best master.
So he went four years to
a cave and lived up there.
And talk about persistence--
>>REGINA: He just
kept bugging the guy.
>>COLE: He just
kept bugging him.
Knock, knock, knock.
Please take me on as a student.
No.
Knock, knock, knock.
And I think the master saw
in him not just perseverance
but the future of Bon
because he figured out a way
to take him on and not
irritate the whole group
of other students who had
come that he had turned away.
And that was he said,
well, as long as you're
painting these little
story cards for me,
then I'll teach you.
Yes, well, it ended up four
years of him instructing him.
So this was very
consequential to his life
in terms of his development.
And he was going to go
from there to the cave
back over in home in Amdo
and live the rest of his life
in meditation.
And his teacher said, no.
The future needs you
to know everything.
>>REGINA: And he did.
He was.
He was insatiable in terms
of his seeking of knowledge.
>>COLE: Yes
>>REGINA: Became a
true, true master.
Meanwhile, let's look at
the political backdrop.
So we have Chiang Kai-Shek.
Are they kind of left alone
under Chiang Kai-Shek,
or is he trying to
move in on Tibet?
>> RICE: Chiang Kai-Shek tried
because even under Chiang
Kai-Shek, they believed that
Tibet was part of China,
that sort of a basic
Chinese belief.
And so he did establish some
garrisons in the Eastern
provinces, but those
were largely ignored,
and they didn't really--
he didn't have any real
political clout in Tibet.
And so there was
a garrison there,
and they were just ignored.
>>REGINA: He wasn't really
trying to shut them down
at that point or anything.
>> RICE: No.
And he didn't have
the wherewithal
to really go to Lawson and
really take over the country.
He was not really
able to do that.
And that was just sort of
a token effort on his part
to try to--
>>REGINA: But Mao Tse
Tung was more efficient.
>> RICE: Because he beat
Chiang Kai-Shek and drove him
to Taiwan.
And that was part
of his next step.
He was going to get China--
I'm sorry, Tibet, I mean to say.
And he accomplished that.
He had a very experienced army
who had been fighting for years,
and they had driven
Chiang Kai-Shek off.
And they had they were
supported by the Soviets,
and they had a lot
of American arms
because the Americans had even
supported Mao against the Jap
when they were
fighting the Japanese.
So they were well-armed, and
they're very disciplined,
and he was able
to make it happen.
>>REGINA: And he
had an agenda, which
was to stomp out these
belief systems also.
That was part of it, right?
>> RICE: That's true.
Well, originally, Mao
had his original idea
was that they didn't
push it too much.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
They were there to,
quote, liberate.
There was a PR campaign
to liberate these people.
From what?
>> RICE: Well, there was nothing
really to liberate them from,
but they just said that, oh,
we're going to liberate you
from--
They had this sort of critique
of capitalism and imperialism,
and they just imposed
that onto Tibet,
where there had been no
imperialism and certainly
no capitalism at all, except
in they had sort of maybe--
>>REGINA: Well,
you said traders.
>> RICE: Yeah, traders.
They did trade, but there was
no capitalist corporations
or people loaning big money to
companies or anything like that.
>>REGINA: But it must have
appealed to some of the Tibetans
that they were going
to be liberated.
>>COLE: It didn't
appeal to any of them.
>> RICE: Very few.
>>REGINA: So they just
basically bullied their way in,
and then really
the brutality began
because they wanted that land.
>>COLE: The brutality
began after they
had been able to set
up an infrastructure.
So they invaded,
and they got as far
as they could get on the
infrastructure that was already
there.
And then they stopped.
And then they started
building roads.
And when they got the roads
built all the way into Lhasa
to where they could supply
the army and to move,
then they started
in on crackdowns.
>>REGINA: And what
they were doing
was essentially taking the
monks and imprisoning them
and shutting down
the monasteries.
They started
brutalizing the nuns.
>> RICE: Yes.
>>REGINA: And it was, really,
this was quite horrific
when you read about when they
first extended into Tibet.
I mean, taking these
poor nuns and raping them
in public in front of people.
I mean, the Chinese really
were brutal with the Tibetans
beyond what I understood.
>>COLE: It was,
especially that case.
It was about about the
first four or five years,
they were OK.
But as they got their
infrastructure better set up,
then they began
to reverse course
in terms of having
coexistence to suppression.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>COLE: They needed to do
that because the religion was
so intertwined with the
government and everything,
so that you couldn't separate--
It wasn't like religion was
separate from the government.
So if you were going to
overthrow the government,
you have to overthrow
the religion.
>>REGINA: It was like
commercialism in the West.
It's part of the fabric
of Western society,
and religion was part
of their society.
I understand what you're saying.
Yeah so they had to tear
the whole thing down.
>>COLE: They tore
And they also flipped for
anybody who was wealthy,
they took their wealth away.
So it was black became
white and up became down.
>>REGINA: And they turned
the Tibetan families
against each other even.
Some were operating as spies.
I mean, that's kind
of hard to imagine
that it could have been so dire
that they would have turned
against each other and
aligned with the Chinese,
but they didn't really
have a lot of choice.
>> RICE: Well, originally,
Mao himself thought it was OK
to just let the religion exist
for a while until the times were
ripe.
But then you had
an administration,
a Communist administration
in Tibet that
was overseeing on the ground.
You had a very large
Communist organization,
and they had recruited some
Tibetans into that as well.
They were more aggressive
than Mao himself,
at least the documents
show that he was.
And so they wanted to be
more forceful in imposing
Communist ideology.
And they saw religion
as an opponent.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
A threat.
>> RICE: And as a threat.
So in about 1956, you see
revolt, military revolt,
armed revolt begin
in Kham and Amdo.
And it's spontaneous at first.
>>REGINA: The eastern
parts of Tibet.
>> RICE: Because the
Chinese went in there.
And in Kham, that
was sort of like this
is a province where the
people were warriors,
and they always
went around armed.
And so the first
thing the Chinese did,
they took away their arms.
And so you cannot carry
rifles or swords anymore.
And that was an
insult. And so you
started seeing they could
only take that so long,
and you started seeing
armed rebellion.
And that's when the
repression really began.
So the worst repression is
beginning in Kham and Amdo
before it reaches Lhasa.
Because the Chinese military
is obviously way more advanced,
have better weapons, better
tactics, and modern tactics,
and they're driving some of
these rebellious factions
into Central Tibet
and into Lhasa.
So all of a sudden, you have
thousands of Kham warriors
who had been fighting Tibet,
and they escape to Lhasa.
>>REGINA: Well, they did
end up coming in handy
in an attempt to save
Lhasa at one point, right?
>> RICE: Yeah.
They were part of
that rebellion.
>>REGINA: Right.
There were armed people there.
And let's get into--
So Tenzin, we're not going to be
able to follow the whole story.
So let's get into where
Tenzin is at this point
and then get into the
Dalai Lama himself and talk
about the way he got out.
A lot of people don't know
how he got out of there.
>>COLE: Well, Tenzin was
in at Menri Monastery,
which is outside of Lhasa.
It's about probably
five or six-hour drive
if you were driving it nowadays.
So at that point,
it was probably
three-day walk over there.
He was there, and he kept
hearing all these stories
and seeing incidences of
the Chinese and neighboring
monasteries where they
were doing education things
and asking people to renounce
their Lamas and so forth.
And he just didn't want to
have anything to do with it.
So he left and went to,
for a number of reasons,
including that, to a monastery
up in the remote Changtang.
And so when the rebellion in
Lhasa occurred in March of 1959,
he was up on the Changtang,
quite a ways away from there.
And at that point,
there was a number
of incidences that occurred
that caused the people of Lhasa
to fear for the
Dalai Lama's safety.
And they went to
his summer palace,
where he was staying, and
surrounded the entire summer
palace, built ditches and
armed themselves with shovels
and whatever they could find--
>>REGINA: Fight to the death.
>>COLE: Yes.
And so he left at that point,
in the middle of all of this--
>>REGINA: You're saying
Tenzin or the Dalai Lama?
>>COLE: The Dalai Lama.
>>REGINA: He had to escape
dressed as a soldier,
as I recall.
>>COLE: Yes.
Yes.
He dressed up and
took his glasses off,
so that people
couldn't recognize him,
separated from his entourage and
rode a donkey out a horse out.
Some of the Kham warriors
that Harvey was talking about
were elicited to
be his companions
and to safety him out.
So he left on one
day, and the next day,
by mistake or happenstance,
but anyway, it was inevitable
that this was going to happen.
And the clash began between
the Tibetans and the army--
>>REGINA: And the Tibetans
didn't have a chance.
>>COLE: They never had a chance.
>>REGINA: And these
people, as they
were fleeing, including Tenzin,
going into this remote area,
I mean, ultimately
crossing the Himalayas.
I mean, just stunning
journeys even
in the winter with
handmade wool boots
on, for example, with a
little bag of some barley
paste and a little yak butter.
And you're lucky if
you even had a yak
to carry something for you.
And hiking at 20,000 with so
little to keep your reserves
going.
So the Tibetans
genetically actually
have become quite
genetically different
in their ability to survive.
>>COLE: They've recently found a
gene that the Tibetans have that
allow them to carry more
oxygen, so it allows
them to live at the altitudes.
Lhasa is at 12.5.
Changtang starts at 15
and goes up from there.
It's an extremely harsh and
very interesting environment.
So I got altitude
sickness when I was there,
and it delayed our ability
to go to a lot of places
while I was
recovering from that.
But that's just an aside.
If you ever get a chance
to go, just be sure
you're prepared or ready to
deal with altitude sickness
because it's a big deal there.
But anyway, the journey,
you're absolutely
right in that journeys that
they faced were amazing.
And they had to walk everywhere.
Now when Tenzin was up on
the Changtang, all of this,
remember the battle, this
has sort of spread down here.
And so it got to Lhasa,
and then he was up here.
In the middle of
all of this, the CIA
decides that they want to help
the Tibetans harass the Chinese.
So they recruited
some Tibetans to train
and then dropped back
into Tibet with arms.
Some of that is occurring up
in the area where Tenzin was.
So when it became apparent that
the Chinese were moving all
through Tibet to
squash the monasteries,
Tenzin decided to leave.
And when he did
that, he happened
to be at the same time as one
of the warlords that we think
was receiving arms from the CIA.
So the Chinese had
congregated there
in order to counter that
information, and that arms drop,
and that warlord.
And he got caught up in that--
>>REGINA: Well, he was
in the foot, as I recall.
>>COLE: In the leg.
>>REGINA: In the leg.
>>COLE: He got shot in the leg.
>>REGINA: And had
to keep walking.
>>COLE: Well,
actually, the Chinese
were walking through
his camp and were
going to finish him off.
And one said, don't bother,
he's going to die anyway.
That's how badly the
wound was in his leg.
And he survived that.
And was about three weeks in the
wilderness with people helping
him before he ended up in a
camp for Tibetans that was run
by Tibetans for the Chinese.
And he stayed there
for 10 months.
And during that time,
he was able to heal
enough to be able to walk out.
>>REGINA: And then
start walking again.
>>COLE: And then to
>>REGINA: And part
of this history
too is that the
Dalai Lama's brother
was recruited by the CIA.
>>COLE: Yes.
The Dalai Lama's brother
is one of the ones that
helped to select the Tibetans
that were used in this program
to train and then drop
back in as guerrillas.
>>REGINA: But in the end, the US
didn't do anything to help them.
You said in the book, they
actually made things worse.
>> RICE: They gave the Tibetans
this false sense that the US
might come to help them.
And they let them--
the CIA let them think that.
But really, what they
wanted was just to annoy--
>>REGINA: The Chinese.
>> RICE: --the Chinese.
And they were never going
to really put the resources
in there necessary to help the
Chinese get their country back,
and that the Tibetans
were counting on that.
And so in the end, they
were really disappointed,
and there's still
bitterness about that.
>>REGINA: You can
understand feeling betrayed.
>>COLE: Even the
people we talked to--
we were fortunate to be able to
talk with one of the CIA guys
who worked with
them on the program.
And he himself was
bitter about it
because he came to love
the Tibetans so much.
>>REGINA: So now
we have a story.
So Tenzin, and
we'll have to move
through the story
a little bit now.
So Tenzin ultimately survives.
Ultimately, they meet a man,
he and the two other characters
with them--
>>COLE: It's a
miracle he survives.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it's crazy.
>>COLE: There are
multiple incidences
of miracles that occurred
that allowed him to survive.
>>REGINA: Like a body
of water freezing
over when it shouldn't
have, just when
he needed for his survival
to get across that river.
>>COLE: Yes.
Like a man who was
trying to escape--
when he was left to die
by a creek, and a man who
was trying to escape himself
came along, and found him,
and stopped, and stayed
there for a couple of weeks
to nurse him.
>> RICE: Saved his life.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Repeatedly.
>>COLE: It was like
the protectors,
the Bon protectors
saved Yongdzin
because they knew he
was needed to save Bon.
>>REGINA: So they go
through all of this,
and ultimately there
comes a day now.
Where did they land
before, what's his name,
David Snellgrove Where were
when David Snellgrove found
them, a Brit, these three monks,
Tenzin and the two others?
>>COLE: Essentially
they were in Kathmandu.
>> RICE: Yeah.
Two of the monks, Samten
Karmay and Sangye Tenzin,
had wanted to preserve--
they're worried
about losing this Bon canon.
And they had starting a
printing operation in New Delhi.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>> RICE: And so Samten stayed
there to oversee the printing
operation while Sangye went up
into Dolpo, which is a Tibetan--
it's ethnically Tibetan,
but it's part of Nepal
because a couple
of hundred years
before that, Nepal
a war with Tibet
and had conquered
that territory,
but it remains to this
day, ethnically Tibetan.
And so there were Bon
monasteries up there.
And so he went there
to get these writings,
and he wanted to reproduce them.
>>REGINA: To save the
religion, to write it all down,
now to make it in printed forms.
>> RICE: And that's where, and
Snellgrove, just coincidentally,
he had become interested in
Bon, and he was in that region
because he knew there
were Bonpos up there.
And there was a
Rockefeller Grant,
and he had gotten
quite a bit of money.
And then he had
to use that money
to find Tibetans and then take
them to a university in Europe.
>>REGINA: That was interesting.
>> RICE: And so he ran into
Tenzin, this was Sangye Tenzin.
And he ran into him,
and he was really
impressed by his intellect
and his knowledge.
And he says, this is a guy
I want to take with me.
So he arranged to
meet him in Kathmandu.
So when Snellgrove
goes there to meet him,
Sangye had gone there and left
before Snellgrove got there,
but he ran into Tenzin Namdak.
And he starts talking to him.
And he is just
wowed by this guy.
>>REGINA: By his
knowledge, yeah.
Well, this guy, David Snellgrove
had learned the language.
I mean, he was very
committed to understanding
Buddhism, Tibetan Buddhism,
and the Bon, Bonpo language
and such.
So he takes them, three
of them, to London.
I mean, it's kind of the stuff
you could make a movie about.
These three guys that have
been on foot their whole lives,
lived on yak butter
and barley paste,
and now they're in London.
Oh, my god.
It was nearly comical.
Because he wants to
be able to inculcate
their knowledge into
the university system
there and preserve
this religion.
But you've got to deal with
these three young guys who
know nothing about
the outside world.
>>COLE: Not only
that, but they're
all independent and headstrong.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And they would just disappear.
They'd just take
off and disappear,
and he had no idea
where they were
because they were used to
being hemmed in and going by--
They didn't have a
day runner in the day.
>> RICE: And the story about
their cultures are so different,
so they had never worn pants
because they don't wear pants
in Tibet.
And so Snellgrove has
these suits made for them.
And so Tenzin namdak
gets a pair of pants.
And he looks at them, and
he sees where the zipper is.
So he puts it on backwards.
He's thinking it's for the back.
>>REGINA: Just in case.
There are things that
have to be done there.
So they've got their
pants on backward.
They're looking at
food, a panoply of food
they can't even imagine.
And I don't know if they're very
comfortable eating a lot of it.
How did their bodies
do with the food
that was put in front of them?
Did they ever say--
>>COLE: I think they did OK.
>>REGINA: Did they do OK?
>>REGINA: They only ever
eaten like three things.
>>COLE: Where they
ran into trouble
was when they originally came
out of Tibet and went into,
Samten Karmay and Sangye Tenzin
ended up in refugee camps.
And they were in India,
which is extremely hot.
So they went from 30
degrees to 120 degrees,
and rice instead of barley,
and dal instead of meat.
And a lot of them, there was a
lot of dysentery in the camps.
And so that's where
they got sick.
And a lot of Tibetans, there
was a number of Tibetans
that died in the refugee
camps from the circumstances.
As much as India and
Nepal helped the refugees,
there was just an overwhelming
situation at the time.
And so there was a
number of Tibetans
that lost their lives,
even after they had crossed
the Himalayas, lost their
lives in the refugee
camps due to dysentery
and other conditions.
>>REGINA: Well, these
guys got through
and were able to, I guess,
ultimately have scones and tea
in London.
So they did.
They worked very
hard with David, to--
David Snellgrove, and they were
able to share their knowledge
and create a course of study
in essence for Snellgrove
and the university
system in England.
>>COLE: Yes.
>>REGINA: And then each one of
them kind of went their own way
and had their own projects.
And so let's start
bringing us up
to a little bit more modern
times of what happened
as these young men grew up.
Where did Tenzin end up?
>>COLE: Tenzin went back.
He felt like his responsibility
was with the Bonpo community.
And in fact, he
corresponded with them
while he was in Europe, and
his main concern was for them.
When he went back to
India, he went by boat
because he gets air sick.
He went back by boat and took
a large crate full of things
that he thought people--
clothes and other things
that he thought people
would be helpful for them.
And then when he
got back, he set
about trying to find a
location for a new village
where the Bonpos could gather
and be together as opposed
to being scattered among all of
the other Tibetan communities
around.
So he set about
making that happen.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And he was successful.
>>COLE: Yes.
>> RICE: And you have to
remember that when the Bonpos,
that is the Indian government
and the Nepalese government
for that matter, they didn't
really know anything about Bon.
So they just thought that
Tibetans were Buddhists.
And so there was no recognition
of this separate religion.
And so all of the grants,
and money, and assistance
was distributed by Buddhists.
And so Bonpos ended up
being on, for instance,
like doing road work under--
that was, and their
boss was a Buddhist.
And sometimes, they would make
them recite Buddhist prayers
because they sort of looked
down their noses, at Bonpos--
>>REGINA: They thought
of them as an underclass.
>> RICE: And so there's a real
worry that Bonpos would be
dispersed and start losing
their religion and their culture
because there were no
monasteries there for them.
And so that's one
reason that Tenzin
felt it was really necessary
to get some land and get--
>>REGINA: Take up a land
and create the community.
>> RICE: So that bonpos
would have a place to look
to in a place where their
culture was preserved.
>>REGINA: And all along the
way, from the very beginning
to some potential
enemies, they had
to trick people along the
way as to their Bon identity
just to survive in the early
days fleeing from the Chinese.
But everyone experienced
them as just the kindest,
most polite people.
Even when they got
to England, they
were just so kind, and helpful,
and jump up and do the dishes
and whatever they could do.
So kind and polite.
But they did it their way.
You don't use soap.
You use your hand
to clean the dishes.
That's how it's done properly.
You get some skin in the game.
And just this reflection
of their deep, deep beliefs
of generosity and
kindness continued
throughout their lives.
Now we only have a
few minutes left.
So that's flown.
So now, we come
to modern history.
Modern times.
I mentioned, spoiler
alert, in the beginning,
Tenzin will be 100 in February.
So the Bon community that
he established is well?
>>COLE: Yes, it's doing well.
Menri Monastery in
exile is in India.
And it is the seat of
Bon in the world now.
And so now, Tenzin established
a second monastery in Kathmandu,
and it is called
Triten Norbutse,
and it is training
new monks as well.
There's a nunnery in Menri,
which now provides women
with the ability to
not only become a nun
but also to get a Geshe degree.
So they're called Geshemas.
>>REGINA: Wonderful.
>>COLE: Yes, it is.
And so they've now graduated,
I think, four or five classes
of Geshemas.
And then so Sangye Tenzin,
who had gone to London
and was part of trying to get
the canon built and everything,
he became the head
of the Bon tradition
there at Menri Monastery.
He passed away in 2017.
Samten Karmay stayed
as an academic
and was the best
known Tibetologist
now in the world with his
work on both Bon and Tibet
scholarly studies.
And then Yongdzin has, besides
the monastery in Kathmandu,
he formed a retreat center
in France called Shenten,
and he has pretty much retired.
He lives in Kathmandu, there
at the monastery in Kathmandu.
And he'll be 100 next year.
>>REGINA: I love it.
And if you have to look at
the silver lining in anything,
if it weren't for the
aggression of the Chinese,
it wouldn't have
forced all this over.
It wouldn't have
forced them out.
David Snellgrove may never
have come in contact with them.
The rest of the
world may never know
about this incredibly
private culture,
up until that time, such a
primate culture, and ultimately
almost lost religion.
>>COLE: I don't know that it's
worth losing their country,
but I can say that it's a great
blessing for me to have been
and the rest of us who have
been touched by Bon, to be
able to have learned it.
>>REGINA: And if one
goes to Lhasa today,
there will be people
following you.
You'll have Chinese patrol
people following you
around, make sure you
don't touch stuff too much.
I mean, isn't Lhasa--
a friend of mine
went there recently.
It has probably been 10
or 15 years ago, actually.
She just said it's
beautiful to be
able to see the antiquity
of it, but she didn't
feel all that comfortable.
>>COLE: Oh, It's terribly
intimidating when we were there.
It is a totalitarian state.
It is very intimidating.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Because a lot of
people, oh, I want
to see the Potala, the
beautiful palace and all that.
Well, there's a price to pay.
OK, well, need not say more.
Well, thank you so much for
going on this great adventure
and sharing this little known
sect of religion with us
that I'd never heard of before.
And it's quite, we
couldn't go into it all.
Very exciting tale.
And all kinds of people
are shot and being dragged
by Lamas, which is just awful.
But they got through it somehow.
The religion survived.
>>COLE: Yes, fortunately.
>>REGINA: It did.
Thank you so much.
>>COLE: Thank you for having us.
>> RICE: Thank you so much.
>>COLE: And it's fun
to be able to talk
about this incredible story.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
Thank you.
The name of the book is The
Flight of the Bon Monks.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.
[THEME MUSIC]